---
layout: post
title: Loops - PHP 0 to hero pt.6
author: wizarddos
category: Programming
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
permalink: /programming/php_0_to_hero/6
is_series: true
series_title: "php_0_to_hero"
part: 6
---


The sixth part of this tutorial is here - today, a very important topic. **Loops**

<!--more-->
That's how this article will be divided:

1. Theory - What is a loop, why they are useful etc.
2. `For` loop
3. `while` and `do-while` loops
4. `foreach` loop

Let's go

## Theory of loops

Let's visualize something:

There is a big web-app with comments, that we are working on. We get assigned to the task, it requires us to write a function, that will change the accounts name to it's ID in every post they've made. There are a 100 thousand comments with one nickname.

Will we spend half of our life manually inputting, which comment should have a change? - of course not

That's pretty much what loops are for - to perform the same tasks, desired number of times

So, going back. In pseudo-code it would look something like this
```
Loop start{
    getIDFromNickname;
    changeNicknameToID;
}
```

Now, let's talk about loops in PHP

We have 4 types of them

## `For` loop

That's actually the hardest one, yet still really popular. 

It looks like this
```php
for (expr1; expr2; expr3){
    // code inside
}
```
What are these expressions? 

`expr1` - A short code, executed right at the beginning, no matter what. 
In 90% of `for` loops, that's a declaration of **loop counter** - a special variable, that will be used later to check how many times code inside a loop was executed
We almost always declare it as `$i`

`expr2` - This expression is evaluated right at the beginning of each **iteration** (In simpler words: An execution of a code inside a loop). 

If expression returns `true` - code is executed
If `false` - loop ends

There, we use Comparison Operators - I talked about them in the [previous article](https://dev.to/wizarddos/php-0-to-hero-pt-5-math-in-php-2l3o)

And a third one - `exp3`
It's the expression executed at the end of an iteration.
We mostly use it to **increment** (add `1` to the variable - very fancy word)

To visualize, we may write a simple pseudo-code:
```php
for(The beginning of the loop; before each iteration; after each iteration){
   // Code to execute
}
```

So - let's print `Hello Loops!` 10 times with `for` loop

```php
for($i = 0; $i < 10; $i++){
    echo "Hello Loops!<br/>";
}
```
And if we want to "read" it:
> set `$i` to `0`
> If `$i < 10` execute code inside, else finish the loop
> Increment $i and go back to the previous step

That's it - now time for the second one

## `while` loop

`While` loop is a little easier, as it takes only one parameter - an expresion

According to the [docs](https://www.php.net/manual/en/control-structures.while.php):
> It (`while` loop) tells PHP to execute the nested statement(s) repeatedly, as long as the while expression evaluates to true

So, if we write the loop like this:
```php
$i = 1;
while($i <=10){
    echo "while is cool</br>";
    $i++;
}
```
We tell the program to execute code inside it, if at the beginning of each iteration the condition in brackets is met

(And by the way, we use the iterator again)


Talking about the `while` loop, there is also another, similar loop

## `do-while` 

It works like the `while` loop, but with one major difference

The expression is evaluated in the end of each iteration, not the beginning. That's why `do-while` is better when we need to execute the code inside it at least once, for example while removing a directory or asking user repeatably for similar input

Now, it looks like this:
```php
$i = 1;
do{
    echo "do-while is cool too</br>";
    $i++;
}while($i <=10)
```

Time for the last one

## `foreach` loop

Personally, I use it the most. 

`foreach` is the easiest way to iterate through the arrays

So, If we have an array that looks like this:
```php
$numbers = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10];
```

And we want to create a new array with that numbers, but to the power of 2

Instead of `for` loop
```php
$powers = [];

for($i = 0; $i < count($numbers); $i++){ 
    array_push($powers, $numbers[$i]**2);
}

// result: 1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81 100 
```
(Quick sidenote: `count()` is a function, that counts elements in the array)

We can write it with `foreach`

```php
$powers = [];
foreach($numbers as $number){
    array_push($powers, $number**2);
}
// result: 1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81 100 
```

Inside brackets we see this - `$numbers as $number`
This means - with each iteration, assign next array element from `$numbers` array to `$number` variable

Now, to access it inside array - we use `$numer` and not `$numbers[$i]`



That's it for today
We've covered how to write and use 4 different loops in PHP

## Conclusion

I hope this article was useful and you got the overall meaning 

Loops are crucial concept in programming, so this article is important one

By the way, I hope you have had a very nice Christmas and I wish you all a happy new year

See you in the next articles
