---
layout: post
title: Introduction - PHP 0 to Hero Pt.0
author: wizarddos
category: Programming
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
permalink: /programming/php_0_to_hero/0
is_series: true
series_title: "php_0_to_hero"
part: 0
---

Welcome again.

I'd like to introduce you to a new series - a full PHP guide.
<!--more-->

In addition to typical programming course elements, such as syntax, I'll also:
- Show how to write well-structured and easy-to-maintain code.
- Talk about creating secure code.
- Guide you, through writing real-world useful scripts.
- Present you best sources about language itself - and give you many ways to improve as PHP developer

### Tutorial Structure

This course consists of two chapters:

1. **Fundamentals**, such as variables, SQL operations, if-else, etc., with easy-to-understand examples.
    If you have some basics, feel free to jump around and read about the topics, you're into the most.
    End of the first one is not the beginning of next, so they can be treated as standalone articles as well - all can be found [here](https://wizarddos.github.io/blog/series/php_0_to_hero.html)

2. **Projects** - The practical part. That's where we'll apply obtained knowledge 

For total beginners I recommend to read articles in a presented order
And now, it's time for some theory - luckily not too much

### A Little about PHP

- PHP is an acronym. A recursive acronym, to be more specific - Stands for "PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor" - And what does "PHP" inside it mean? "PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor" - and so on.

- It's a scripting language created in 1995 by Rasmus Lerdorf.

- PHP is still developed and new functionalities are added - to learn more about additions check out it's official website, [php.net](https://www.php.net/).

- You think about carrer in IT? PHP is perfect language for back-end development

- PHP promotes **object oriented programming** (OOP in short) - I covered it in parts 14 and 15. 

## Afterword

Done and dusted - that's some PHP theory.

Next time, we will be installing and configuring PHP's environment on both Linux and Windows.

Stay tuned, and subscribe to my newsletter - so you don't miss anything

That's it. See you next time.
